THE REFORMED CHURCH OF SÂNGEORGIU DE MUREȘ
Until the mid-1600s, Sângeorgiu de Mureș was a Reformed mother-church with Livezeni as an affiliated church. Due to the recatolization efforts of the Petki family, the importance of the local Reformed church declined.
By the end of the 18th century, conditions improved and the service of the priest and school teacher from Livezeni was extended to Sângeorgiu de Mureș as well. In the last third of the 1700s, the noblewoman of the village donated devotional objects and relics to the church. The parish also received new lads, mainly through donations. In 1823, the widow of count József Petki donated a seven-acre plot of land to the Reformed church of Sângeorgiu de Mureș. The place of worship was built on this property. However, the small house of prayer did not meet the needs of the growing congregation. In 1908, a 15-member committee was elected to prepare the construction of the new place of worship. In December 1918, a request to turn the church into a mother church and to open “a new priestly office” in Sângeorgiu de Mureș was submitted to the deanery. This finally took place in 1926. Eventually, with the help of the bishop and the patronage, the church was built in 1935, also housing the school and the vicarage. In 1981, the corridor of the former school was demolished and a council chamber was built; the vicarage was also enlarged. In 1988, the state repossessed parts of the parish land. This time, 11 acres were appropriated for the construction of a block of flats.
In 1991, a church partnership was established with the Niyverdal congregation in the Netherlands, whose members provided significant help to the church in Sângeorgiu de Mureș. In 1994, preparations began to construct the church tower according to the plans of Kali Ellák. By Christmas 1995, the porch was demolished and a tower for the small bell was erected. The pastor of the church at this time was László Adorjáni, who served the congregation until 2003. After his retirement, the members of the church elected and invited reverend Eörs Becsky as their pastor. The Reménység (Hope) Reformed Choir, the Shalom youth group, the Reformed Women’s Fellowship are all part of church life. A number of Reformed intellectuals and musicians established the Manna ensemble, which serves the community with modern religious songs. The church also showcases a memorial plaque to the Hungarian soldiers of Sângeorgiu de Mureș who fell in the First and Second World Wars.
